---
title: "Converting an old PC to an OpenWRT router"
description: "Setting up an x86 OpenWRT router and adding a non-OpenWRT Access Point"
layout: post
toc: true
comments: true
hide: false
search_exclude: false
categories: [networking]
metadata_key1: metadata_value1
metadata_key2: metadata_value2
---

## Background
* I purchased a [Lenovo ThinkCentre M910s i5-6500 8GB 256GB SSD Small Form Factor SFF Desktop PC](https://www.ebay.ca/itm/125556152754) as the PC to run OpenWRT. Yes, it is massively overkill for a router. However I needed a PC with a PCIe slot to add in a 4-port NIC, and I'd rather have performance overkill than underkill.
* I added a 4-port Intel network card (specifically an HP NC365T Intel i340-T4 Quad Port Network Card Adapter) to the PCIe slot before I installed any OS. I thought this might have been a mistake as I was expecting to have to install drivers, however OpenWRT recognized this NIC immediately and no additional configuration was required.

## Wiping the hardrive
* I used the BIOS to wipe the drive. However if I were to do it again, I would use a [GParted Live USB](https://gparted.org/liveusb.php) to wipe the disk as you get visual confirmation of what you are doing including whether there are any other partitions on the drive. The only reason why I did not take this approach (which I have in the past) is because I was using a Macbook as my workstation during the setup (creating a GParted USB is possible on a Mac but is more complicated).  

## Creating the USB installation media
* If you are following along with the [x86 installation instructuons](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/installation/openwrt_x86), they mention the `ext4-combined.img.gz` vs the `ext-combined-efi.img.gz` image files (none of the other images made sense for our use case). Most online tutorials do not mention the `efi` version, therefore it must be relatively new. I ended up using the "old" `ext4-combined.img.gz` - but this was a mistake.
* In order to get the `ext4-combined.img.gz` working, I had to disable Safe Boot set UEFI boot to Legacy in the BIOS, which took me a long time to figure out.
* According to [the docs](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-developer/uefi-bootable-image): 
> UEFI boot has been required for years now, boards that only support UEFI are common, and Intel has stated back in 2017 that “legacy” BIOS will no longer be supported after 2020.
* I think the only reason I was able to configure the BIOS this way is because the system is 6+ years old and has an older BIOS; I assume this configuration would not be possible on newer machines. Therefore if I were to do it over again, I would use the `ext-combined-efi.img.gz` image - this *should* avoid having to set the BIOS as described.

## Running OpenWRT from the USB media
* So long as the USB is sufficiently high in the boot priority BIOS setting, OpenWRT will run when you start the machine after inserting the USB. However as mentioned in the [x86 installation instructions](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/installation/openwrt_x86), you are required to move the boot and disk partitions (OpenWRT has these two partitions from the image we downloaded) to the machine's permanent disk.
* I faced two problems trying to do this:
1. The SSD was not formatted corrently
2. Migrating the partitions from the USB to the SSD did not work - the SSD partitions became corrupted.

## Formatting the SSD
* There are [instructions on the OpenWRT site](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/storage/usb-drives#create_a_partition_on_the_usb_disk) that describe how to format the SSD. It took me a while to realize that because Windows was installed on this SSD previously, the disk *was not formatted correclly*.
* As long as you follow the instructions linked above, you will format the SSD correctly while running OpenWRT on the USB. However in hindsight this was more work than it needed to be. If I had used a tool like GParted, I could have formatted this disk to be an `ext4` filesystem after wiping the disk.

## Migrating the partitions from the USB to SSD
* I first noticed the corruption when I tried to boot the newly flashed OpenWRT router without the USB. I quickly found out that I couldn't edit any of the files - everything on the SSD was **read only**. A quick search identified that the likely cause was disk corruption.
* After corrupting the disk, I actually decided against trying to migrate the files again. Instead, I followed [this forum reply](https://forum.openwrt.org/t/copying-openwrt-to-new-disk/61020/2) and just downloaded the image to the SSD *while running OpenWRT on the USB drive*.

```
wget https://downloads.openwrt.org/releases/22.03.2/targets/x86/64/openwrt-22.03.2-x86-64-generic-ext4-combined.img.gz
gzip -d -c openwrt-22.03.2-x86-64-generic-ext4-combined.img.gz | dd of=/dev/sda bs=1M
```

* While this meant any settings I had configured via LUCI were reset, it was worth it to ensure the system was set up correctly.
* Note that again, if we had a GParted USB drive, we could have done the `wget` within this Linux environment and not had to run OpenWRT just to download OpenWRT on another drive.

## Getting WAN
* Because I now had 5 ethernet ports (1 embedded port, 4 from the installed NIC), OpenWRT seemed to randomly assigned which port was the WAN port. In order to identify which one was the WAN, you just try each until ping works (or the shell shows you a message that you are conencted to the internet, but I forget what this output message was)

## Adding other ports to LAN
* By default, only one other port is enabled. In order to add the other ports, you must edit the `br-lan` (default LAN that OpenWRT creates) and **add multiple `eth` ports** to this network.

## Adding a WiFi Access Point
* This concept took me the longest to figure out. If you search for OpenWRT + access point, *almost all* of the posts refer to WiFi devices *that have OpenWRT installed* in addition to having OpenWRT installed on the main router. However my use case was to leverage a **non-OpenWRT WiFi router as a "dumb" access point for the x86 OpenWRT router**. 
* Maybe for some this was just obvious, but there were two key points that I needed to figure out:
1. You need to set your non-OpenWRT WiFi router as an Access Point. You do this by logging into the router and changing its settings (this varies by device)
	1. It was only possible to change the router to Access Point mode after temporarily reverting it back as the primary router. 
	2. Without putting the old router in Access Point mode, it *did not request a local IP address from the OpenWRT DHCP server* because *DHCP was still enabled on this old device*.
2. Connecting any device to a LAN port means that device is just an extension of that local network. Therefore, connecting a WiFi router in Access Point mode simply converts wireless traffic to wired traffic on the LAN.
	1. Contrary to what I assumed, you use **a LAN port** on the access point device, and not its WAN port. Therefore, there is a connection from a LAN port on the OpenWRT router and a LAN port on the access point.
	2. Restart the ISP modem (see below)
* Note that currently (and maybe always?) we still set the WiFi network SSID and password by connecting to the WiFi device. However note that its **ip address has changed** - it is no longer `X.X.X.1`, since our new router has this local IP address. It has a unique local IP address provided by the DHCP on our new OpenWRT router.

> When in doubt, reset (ie. unplug and re-plug) your ISP modem to ensure your new router is recognized by the ISP modem. I can't stress this enough - even though it is painful because the resetting takes so long, this step is needed to ensure the two devices (ISP modem and OpenWRT router) recognize eachother

## Resizing the OpenWRT rootfs Partition

I ended up using an old Windows laptop to create my GParted bootable USB. It was then straightorward to adjust the `rootfs` partition size to 150 GB (way more than what is needed). This was needed to ensure any apps and log files didn't take up too much disk space to the point that the router would not start anymore.

## Setting up Adguard

A good starting pont for setting up Adguard on OpenWRT is [this video - see chapter 4 video marker](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q-xDtCxnD0Q&t=1510s). This video covers how to update your system so that the primary DNS server is Adguard, which then forwards DNS requests to dnsmasq. Importantly Marc covers the *sequence* that this needs to be done.

> If you screw up the Adguard install like I did, completely remove Aguard from the router [using the instructions](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/services/dns/adguard-home). Then reboot the router and reinstall Adguard

If you follow all of these steps, you still may run into DNS issues like I did. Essentially, most of the devices on the network required manually setting the DNS - it seemed that Adguard *was not advertising* as the DNS server despite listening on Port 53. Therefore I made 2  additional setting changes.

### DNS Interception

I had read that some devices attempt to use their own DNS protocols despite the router providing one. I therefore set up [DNS Interception](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/services/dns/adguard-home) by editing the IP tables to route all traffic requests on Port 53 to this router (irrespective of their destination DNS IP address). This by itself didn't fix the DNS advertising issue, but it seemed like a good idea to implement anyway.

### Interface DHCP Settings

A great [wiki](https://forum.openwrt.org/t/openwrt-adguard-home-101-dnsmasq/110864) on using OpenWRT + Adguard + DNSMASQ contained a lot of good information. In particular, [this post](https://forum.openwrt.org/t/openwrt-adguard-home-101-dnsmasq/110864/81) had the ultimate solution: updating the *interface* DHCP settings (and not the DHCP settings on the router)

What that meant was going to Network > Interfaces > LAN > Edit > DHCP Server > Advanced Settings. Here you can set the DHCP-Options filed to your DNS server (which annoyingly in this setup is the IP address of this very router). Don't forget to add a `6`  and a `3`in front of the IP addresses like `6,192.168.0.1` and `3,192.168.0.1`. I don't know why this was required, but it worked - all devices now found the DNS server without any special setup.

## Next Steps

This is a good and usable setup as it is - we have a speedy custom router that routes all DNS traffic through Adguard. As it stands, this is the best internet setup I've had at home (I think the internet speed has actually "increased" due to the absence of ads traffic). However there are two additional features I want to have available:

1. Configure the upstream DNS server to use **authoratative** and **root** servers
2. Create a VPS-hosted VPN to route/tunnel traffic through in order to:
	1. Hide my IP address
	2. Route traffic through the UK (would be via a second VPS as this would be slower for everyday use) in order to easily use the services from when we were living there
	